# Proctal

Proctal provides a command line interface and a C library to manipulate the
address space of a running program on Linux. It allows you to read and write
values from a process' memory.


## Example

### CLI

Assuming `22002` is a Process ID (PID) and `1803acc` is an address.

	$ proctal read --pid=22002 --address=1803acc
	123
	$ proctal write --pid=22002 --address=1803acc 124
	$ proctal read -p 22002 -a 1803acc
	124

### C library

A program that takes a Process ID (PID) and an address to an integer value as
arguments and reads the value then increments by 1 each time it's run.

	#include <stdio.h>
	#include <sys/types.h>

	// Declares proctal's functions.
	#include <proctal.h>

	int main (int argc, char **argv)
	{
		if (argc == 1) {
			printf("Usage: %s <pid> <address>\n", argv[0]);
			return 0;
		} else if (argc != 3) {
			fprintf(stderr, "Incorrect number of arguments.\n");
			return 1;
		}

		pid_t pid;

		if (sscanf(argv[1], "%hd", &pid) != 1) {
			fprintf(stderr, "Failed to parse process id.\n");
			return 1;
		}

		void *addr;

		if (sscanf(argv[2], "%lx", (unsigned long *) &addr) != 1) {
			fprintf(stderr, "Failed to parse address.\n");
			return 1;
		}

		int read;

		// Attempts to read an int from an other process. May fail if
		// your program does not have permission to access the address
		// space of other processes.
		if (proctal_read_int(pid, addr, &read)) {
			fprintf(stderr, "Failed to read from %p of process %d.\n", addr, pid);
			return 1;
		}

		printf("Read %d from address %p of process %d.\n", read, addr, pid);

		// Just going to increment the read value.
		int write = read + 1;

		// Attempts to write an int to an other process. May fail if
		// your program does not have permission to access the address
		// space of other processes.
		if (proctal_write_int(pid, addr, write)) {
			fprintf(stderr, "Failed to write to %p of process %d.\n", addr, pid);
			return 1;
		}

		printf("Written %d to address %p of process %d.\n", write, addr, pid);

		return 0;
	}


## Usage

### CLI

The command line interface can be used in the following ways:

	proctal read [--type=<type>] --pid=<pid> --address=<address>
	proctal write [--type=<type>] --pid=<pid> --address=<address> <value>

For more details run `proctal -h` or read the man page:

	man 1 proctal


### C library

Can be used by linking to libproctal and including proctal.h

Available functions are documented in the header file.


## Installation

Proctal provides a 3 step installation process employed by many C/C++ programs
on Linux:

	$ ./configure
	$ make
	$ make install

The configure script allows you to define how you want Proctal to be compiled
and installed. For more information type `./configure -h`.


## Development

Proctal uses the autotools to generate build systems for UNIX like operating
systems. I will provide instructions on how to get you quickly started to
generate a development build.

To get the autotools ready for use, you will need to run `autoreconf` with the
`-i` option:

	$ autoreconf -i

You will notice that now there are new files and directories in the project.
These were generated by `autoreconf` and can be ignored.

With the tools ready to use, you can now generate a build. I recommend using
different build directories for different purposes. Here's how you can create
a build that surpresses optimizations and adds debugging symbols:

	$ mkdir -p build/debug
	$ cd build/debug
	$ ../../configure 'CFLAGS=-g -O0'

So with a build system in place, you can now start compiling by running the
`make` command in your build directory:

	$ make

If you modify a source file and run `make` again it should detect the change
and recompile again.

For tinkering with the source code this is the least you need to know about
the build system. For more details on what you can do with the autotools read
the manuals over at gnu.org [[1]].


## Contributing

Found a bug or want to contribute code? Feel free to create an issue or send a
pull request on GitHub [[2]].


## License

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

[1]: https://www.gnu.org/software/
[2]: https://github.com/daniel-araujo/proctal
